How's the weather like up there? Pretty good. It's been clear for the last few
days. It was foggy this morning. It hasn't been really cold yet. That's a very
good recording there. We'll leave it just like that. It rained down here for a
whole week and now it's back to dry and hot. I see. My son is in St. Louis and
I've been getting some news of the weather in that general direction. Okay.
Generally, a lot of the questions I'm going to be asking you, you've already
answered in several essays that you've written. But our audience that listens to
the show probably hasn't read most of those. Okay.
All right. More check over here. Okay, are you ready? Yes. If you could speak
just a little more loudly, I'm having a little trouble hearing you. Okay. Is
this better? Yes. Thank you. Okay. You're considered one of the best of the hard
science fiction writers. Why is scientific realism so important in your work?
I'm not sure I'm a good enough psychoanalyst to answer that. I just feel that I
have trouble writing something unless I can more or less convince myself that it
might happen. The best example, I guess, was my attempt a few years ago to write
a story for an anthology of vampire tales. When I had finished it, I discovered
that it was a science fiction story. I just accounted for everything that
happened on a scientific basis, and I wasn't happy about it until I could
account for them that way. A lot of your early work was for John Campbell, is
that right? That's right. He was noted for his want of science fiction accuracy.
Did that shape the way that you wrote? Yes, very certainly it did. John was the
one who bought my first several stories. I knew him quite well, talked to him
quite often. While I didn't always agree with him, we both felt that there were
rules and that they ought to be followed. What kind of rules were those? Well, I
mean, rules of the universe. We were both materialists, I guess. We felt that
the universe does run by rule. And we felt that a story was most believable when
it matched those rules, at least as we, we meaning humanity in general,
currently understood them. How did you get started writing? Rather gradually. I
was reading the stuff originally. I started, I think, with the Buck Rogers comic
strip, and I discovered there were magazines. I began telling the stories that
I'd read in magazines to friends in the grade school playground and to Boy
Scouts at campfires. Then I began correcting some of the errors that I spotted
in the stories and eventually began trying to write my own. And your novel,
Mission of Gravity, that one's really noted for how you designed and built the
world of Mesklin. Am I pronouncing that right? That's right. How did you go
about designing the world of Mesklin? It was mostly slide rule work. Part of
it was my contrary nature. I had read stories in which planets had extra heavy
gravity, stories in which the planets had very light gravity. It seemed sort of,
of course, there could be no planet with varying gravity. And I took the, of
course, as a challenge. So I went to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm
materialist. I have serious doubts in things like gravity screens and anti
-gravity machines. The only thing I could think of which would produce such a
variation was rapid spin. And this was before you could steal time on computers
because they hadn't been invented. I did a good deal of slide rule work and also
some consultation with such astronomy text as I could get hold of. And I came up
with what seemed to be a valid planet at the time. There have been errors
discovered in it since, I'm afraid. Does that have reference to the afterword
that you have in the book, Mission of Gravity, where you have what you call the
game? Yes. Somebody was playing the game. I believe it was a group of members of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Science Fiction Society, Mitzvahs for
short. And they began taking Mesklinite, MITSFS for short. And they began
taking Mescalon apart mathematically. I understand from some of them that the
planet actually should come to a sharp edge of the equator instead of a smooth
curve. But I am not a good enough mathematician myself to check up on this
point. Well, you had some heavy guns there at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. One thing I never was able to discover, possibly through my own
error, how did the Mesklinites speak to each other? They used a vocal language,
sound. They didn't breathe as we did. I tried to account for their having vocal
apparatus by its developing from a swimming siphon analogous to those of our own
squids.
Now, this is in reference to a few things that I've read. Some people say that
your alien psychology is too human. And then other people say that you create a
very alien psychology. How do you go about developing the psychology for your
aliens? Well, I am not sure, first of all, that an intelligent being's
psychology would be all that different from the human one anyway. It is going to
depend on the being's motivation. Presumably, the creature will be driven so as
to survive. He or she or it or they, if they have several sexes, are going to
have drives to find food, to avoid pain. If they do have sexes, they will have
drives to use them, exercise them. And all of those will tend to provide
motivation, recognizably similar to those of humanity. I have a book that's just
come out, the nitrogen fix, in which my alien does not have sex. And I spent a
good deal of time trying to find an alternative drive which would be as
powerful. I think I found it, but I'm not going to go into that here. I'd rather
you brought the book and decided for yourself. The planning part depended on
that belief, mostly. I felt that the drives could be at least understood by a
human being. For those people who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not
human in psychology, I'm afraid I have a rather cynical answer. My secret for
making a being seem non-human is to make him act rationally. For example, I can
be fairly specific about this one. In the sequel to Mission of Gravity,
Starlight, at one point I had one of my Mesklinites driving one of these giant
tanks along completely unknown territory. And nothing was happening. He wanted
to get somewhere. And he gradually began going a little faster, a little faster
as a human being would do. Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and
slowed down again, which is, of course, the rational thing to do. My own
suspicion is that nine human beings out of ten would not have slowed down until
they'd run into something.
Hang on, we picked up a whistle here. There it went.
What caused you to write the sequels to both Mission of Gravity and Needle?
In a sense, I was talked into it. I was very uneasy about sequels and series
stories in general. My experience had been reading them, but I was always
disappointed by the later ones. I'd formed my opinion of what things were like,
and the later stories usually changed those opinions and disappointed me. The
Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of a conversation, I think at one of
the New York conventions. A fan said something, and I can't now remember exactly
what it was, which sounded like a good idea to use the Mesklinites, and I built
it up from there. I can be much more specific about the Needle sequel. There was
one particular science fiction fan who was always asking me when it was going to
come out. Every time I met him at a convention, when is the Needle sequel
coming, Hal? Finally, he changed his tactic. One fine day at a Philadelphia
convention, he walked up to me and said, Hal, you promised if I stopped smoking
you would write a sequel to Needle. I've stopped. Get at it. Well, I had no
recollection of ever making such a deal, but I couldn't spoil any such success
story, so I got to work on it. Not very fast, but I got a little done. Then I
was telling this same story at another convention, I think in Toronto, two or
three years later, and Judy Lynn Delray of Delray Books overheard me, and the
next thing I knew I had signed a contract. So he got what he wanted anyway. He
got what he wanted. It's the gent to whom the book is dedicated. He just called
me up a couple of nights ago. He's been out of the country and just got back, so
I guess he's getting back into science fiction activities.
There's sort of a tongue-in-cheek style that you have in that short story,
critical factor, where the beings living in the Earth beneath us are just as
unaware of us as we are of them. Yes. What type of psychology and physiology did
you come up with to develop a being like that that can flow through solid rock?
It was written long enough ago now, so I'm afraid I don't recall all the details
of what led up to it. The idea of having creatures not understanding or not
being aware of others has been part of my basic science fiction frame for a long
time. I think it's a very likely sort of thing, though I don't like to go into
anything as extreme as the fourth dimension. The idea of something which could
soak through rock, well, I have had courses in things like seismology, although
I never specialized in any of the geological sciences. I know a reasonable
amount of chemistry, and this just seemed like a perfectly possible situation to
me. And it was fun figuring out what would happen when a creature like this
encountered an open space where gravity could take over. Yeah, being that he had
never felt force of gravity before. Right. Which, of course, a fish wouldn't
have either. I may possibly have considered intelligent fish when I was planning
that story, but as I say, it was so long ago now I don't really remember. This
was 27 years or so ago, as I recall. Yeah. You wrote most of your short stories
early on, didn't you? Yes. It's been a hobby all along, and in the last few
years there somehow seems to have been less and less time. I've been doing more
work connected with my profession of high school science teaching. I'm currently
president-elect of the New England Association of Chemistry Teachers, and I have
an awful feeling that's going to take a lot of my time for the next two and a
half years. It sounds like it might take a bunch of your time. Yeah. I find
Needle one of your most fascinating books. In fact, it was one of the first
science fiction books that I read, which you can sort of bracket my age from
that point. Yeah. But it's been said, by whom I don't know, but that a good
science fiction mystery couldn't be written. Yes, John Campbell used to make
that claim, and I suspect that Needle was written at least partly to try to
prove John wrong. Ah. When it was coming out as a serial, he made one of his
trips to the greater Boston area. The first of the two parts of the serial was
on the stands then, and he began to talk about it to an MIT audience, got a loud
scream of, don't give the solution away. He admitted that he was wrong about
science fiction mysteries not being possible. The detective in the
Needle is a symbiote living in its host body. Yeah. That's a really unique idea.
How did you formulate that idea? Well, the idea is really not very new. The
basic notion of what you might call possession has been part of human mythology
probably since long before we learned to write. And many science fiction stories
prior to Needle had had this, that, or the other sort of creature entering the
human body and doing various things. The one I can remember most vividly was by
Nathan Schachner, a two-part serial called Infra Universe, which appeared in the
December 1936, January 1937 issues of Astounding Stories. One reason that I'm
that good in the memory is I have the December 36 Astounding open in front of
me. At the moment, I've been reading old collection stuff. And that had virus
-like creatures moving into the human body and taking control. Again, I was more
materialistic. I didn't think that such a creature could take over as easily as
was suggested in some of these stories. And I felt that the hunter would have to
do quite a job of work before he had any real effect of communication, to say
nothing of control in his host. Yeah, all during my reading of the Needle, I was
wondering, you know, why doesn't he vibrate his ear? And, of course, in the
sequel, that's what you have him doing. Eventually, yes, the idea was worked
out. Well, I have to admit that that idea didn't occur to me until later. We'll
just have to admit that it didn't occur to the hunter either. Ah, yeah. You and
the hunter probably go along in the same thought processes, as it were. Well,
yes. I'm not the sort of craftsman who can come up with a personality totally
different from my own and make it sound believable. There are people who are
much better at that art than I am. Robert Heinlein, for example, can write
Stranger in a Strange Land, become practically a god to the hippies, and then
write Starship Trooper and have everybody thinking he's a Nazi. And this, in my
opinion, neither of them reflects his own beliefs. It simply shows his skill at
the character portrayal. I can't do that. I can't come close to it. No, but you
do the best of aliens I've ever read. Do you have any authors that you like or
any people that you like who put together good aliens? Well, my favorite, I
think, is Poul Anderson, who has done a good deal of this sort of thing, too. We
have worked together to a certain extent. We collaborated by mail in putting
together the planetary system in which his novel Fire Time took place. I
supposedly have rights to a few planets in the same system, and if time ever
permits, I may write some stories about them. Aside from aliens, do you have any
authors who you like who write hard science? Or who do you think are writing
good hard science? Well, Poul still comes to mind, first of all. Arthur Clarke,
of course, knows his relevant space science very thoroughly, and he doesn't do
silly things like having spaceships fall into the sun when their engines quit.
Isaac Asimov, although he doesn't write very much science fiction now, seldom
makes really serious science mistakes in it. A lot of the new writers, I'm sorry
to say I can't cite by name. Several of them are pretty good. But my memory for
names is terrible, and it's the start of the school year, and I'm currently
trying to learn the names of about 75 students of my own. And I can't, some of
these young fellows, well, let's see. Alan Dean Foster comes to mind, but
unfortunately he's made some rather serious astronomical slips. Who else? Names
don't come to my mind at the moment, I'm sorry. I have the same problem.
This is a bit off the beaten track, but on the same question of aliens. Has
anybody ever put together a good alien for the movies? I haven't seen by any
means all of the movie science fiction things. The one that was called alien, I
gather, was very impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding detailed portrayal of
his or its or her nature, which is, of course, a perfectly good trick. I can't
think of any alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in
character, believably alien. Now, what was his name, Yoda or something like
that, and the Empire Strikes Back was funny and good as far as, I guess, it's he
went. Who else? Now, that's pretty well. Well, that's the only one I can think
of who was very impressive. There were several unnamed species in the bar scene
in the first of the shows, the Star Wars, where the disguise was good. The
arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language produced a very
impressive and funny scene, but again, you can't really tell what the
personalities of the creatures were like. They were very much like drunks in a
terrestrial bar. I think a good job was done, but I wouldn't say they were
really alien. I don't know what can be done. The visual field,
either movies or TV, represents quite a different problem from the writing one,
and I know just enough about it to realize what the difference is. I would
question my own ability to write a good TV script or movie script, because you
are depending a great deal on what the customer sees, rather than on the words
you can use, the paragraphs you can build, to explain what the background
situation is. I don't know how that problem is solved, really. Probably with a
lot of money. Well, that certainly helped. But I don't think money is the whole
answer to a problem like that. You need somebody who has not merely an
imagination, but a skill in the field. He has to have experience. He has to have
knowledge, which I think probably can only come from experience, of what those
visual media can and can't do, and in what ways practically they differ from the
written word. And here I'm quite aware of my own limitations, and I shouldn't
even try to sell what those differences are, because most of them I probably
don't even recognize. Yeah, I see what you mean now, though.
Remix through my list of questions here. On your current book, Nitrogen Fix,
without giving away the plot, how did you come up with the idea of the Earth,
where just the oxygen has gone out of the atmosphere, or at least it's bonded
with nitrogen? That's right. The idea itself is not new. It was used many years
ago in a story called The Mightiest Machine by John Campbell, in which someone
invented a catalyst which permitted the direct combination of nitrogen and
oxygen to the nitrogen pentoxide. Actually, such a catalyst wouldn't work,
apparently, nearly as I've been able to figure out from the available free
energies concerned. But with a little juggling and having life forms involved,
which can balance off the increase in free energy in one place with a decrease
in another, it seemed possible to me. Also, again, I was more careful
quantitatively than John was. He had the snowflakes of nitrogen pentoxide
drifting out of the sky and bursting into flame as they hit organic matter and
oxidized it, and the red-brown gases that rose when the high oxides of nitrogen
got reduced by other things like organics, and the streams fuming as the oxides
of nitrogen roiled in. There's a very impressive book, Beautiful Adventure
Story, but unfortunately there isn't that much oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere.
You couldn't have made that much di-nitrogen pentoxide. And I had to tone
everything down a good deal and have the worst of it have happened in the past
and try to figure out what the final results would have been, or intermediate
results anyway, a couple of thousand years after things had started. But I'd
been working on that quantitatively for a long time because I can remember
giving a talk on the general subject to a local college somewhere about the
winter of 1958-59. Oh, so you've been working on the basic outline of this book
for a long time. Yes, indeed. Are you working on anything new right now? Only in
the sense that whenever I think of some idea which might be useful, I stick it
on a 3x5 card and put it where I can find it again, and the pile of cards gets
high enough, I start spreading it out and seeing if they can be put into any
sort of rational sequence. School has just started in the last couple of weeks,
and I really haven't time to do very much of that for a while. I won't have for
a few months. I won't have time. Well, Christmas vacation will be the first time
I can do very much on that line. All right. Well, that wraps through what I
wanted to ask you about.
Let me check your address here. Once we get this tape produced, I'll send you a
copy of it. Thank you very much. 12 Thompson Lane. 12 Thompson. Thompson Lane. T
-H-O-M-P-S-O-N. Yeah, Milton, Massachusetts. That's right. Okay. 0-2-1-8-7. All
right. Was there anything specific that you might want to talk about? I don't
know. I get my enthusiasms and my dislikes the same as everyone else, but with a
political season coming up, I probably shouldn't irritate people by talking
about them. Most of my strong opinions are either scientific or anti-scientific
subjects. I happen to be very pro-nuclear. A lot of my friends are not. I don't
know what else I could do. If I get started on that, it might go on
indefinitely, and you probably wouldn't want that. We talked not too long ago
with Jack Williamson. We went out to Patalus and talked with him for a while.
And one of the things he was rather adamant on was the fact that he was getting
a little tired of some of the ecologists saying, well, listen, we need to do
this with wind power and this power and that power, and the fact that no one has
ever been harmed in a nuclear accident of any sort. Well, I'm not entirely sure
of that. I think some of the military reactors may have caused some trouble, but
it's quite true as far as I know the commercial ones have not. The thing that
bothers me is that an awful lot of these people offer solar power as though it
were the panacea, and a little bit of fairly straightforward arithmetic,
starting with the fact that we used something like 2 trillion kilowatt hours of
electricity in 1975, suggests that the minimum amount of solar collecting
surface at 15% efficiency, which is about where we are now, which could provide
that, and that's making awfully generous allowance for how long in the day the
sun is above the horizon and how often we don't have clouds. It's something like
1,600 square miles of collector, or roughly the area of the state of Rhode
Island, and those collectors would have to be mounted so they face the sun all
the time, which means far enough apart so they didn't shadow each other morning
and evening, and A, I'm very dubious about our being able to build anything like
that amount of solar unit within the several decades. I'm even more dubious
about our being able to operate it without the usual run of industrial
accidents, and I'm a little leery about the suggestion that you could possibly
shadow that much countryside with no ecological consequences. It doesn't seem to
be a fair trade-off. I'm not saying... I am in favor of using the sun as much as
possible, and certainly even nuclear power won't last forever, but I think that
some of its opponents have gotten just a little bit unrealistic when they start
talking about what we should do instead of nuclear. This is my
opinion. I could at length defend it quantitatively, but I don't think that's
quite what you want on this program, and I just feel fairly strongly about it,
and some at least of the anti-nuke stuff I hear is the most incredible bilge. I
have to admit some pro-nukers out of bilge, too, but I don't think... This may
be a selective observation on my part, but I don't think there's quite as much
of it from that side. I just personally, for myself, too, I tend to agree with
you because I live outside of town where we run two nuclear power plants all the
time. Yeah. And for the most part, nobody thinks anything about it. It seems to
me, well, I have a button on my chest right now saying a real double standard,
anti-nuke signs on cars. The automobile, beyond any argument, is many times more
dangerous just looking at the box score. Some people say, well, it's not a fair
comparison because you can leave the automobile alone if you want, and I
question this. I don't think a person who wants to be within reach of such
amenities of civilization as grocery stores and library facilities would find it
as easy to avoid the automobile as he would to avoid the nuclear power plants.
Interesting. Well, since we're not really doing a show on nuclear energy...
Right. Well, you brought me started, though. I'm sorry. No, that's quite all
right. I hold many of the same views myself. Listen, I appreciate your time very
much. We will send you the tape here in about three weeks. Okay. Thank you very
much indeed. Okay. We're working on some funding, whether it'll come through or
not, is sheer speculation, to get our show syndicated nationally. Oh, that would
be good. And if we do, we'll probably... We're going to keep the master copy,
and we edit a dubbed copy into the program. Right. Good. And we'll probably re
-edit this, and then put it... make it available for the nationally syndicated
stuff. Good. Look forward to hearing it, if and
when. Yeah. And all of our... our tapes are being made available to the Science
Fiction Research Association. Oh, good. Fine. So if they ever want to use them
for anything, they'll have them there. Okay. Listen, I appreciate it once
more, and... Okay.